---
layout: article
title: Common Dynarec Optimizations
author: cqcumbers
---

Many emulator developers are interested in the performance advantages of dynamic
recompilers, but fewer have implemented one. A good way to start is through one
of the beginner tutorials available on the Getting Started page. But while the
simple dynarecs described by these tutorials may be satisfactory for some
systems, a lot more performance remains on the table, and in between beginner
content and the cutting edge there are many widely known optimizations that can
be taken for granted by more experienced developers. This article will cover
some of these baseline optimizations, with a focus on getting the most
performance for the least code complexity.

## Introduction

It is important to note before we start that there are some inherent limitations
to what this guide can help you with. Obviously, it will not cover bottlenecks
outside of the JIT, of which there are plenty in most full system emulators. As
you optimize the bottlenecks will naturally shift - remember to profile changes
and target the parts that actually need improvement, which is frequently
scheduling and synchronization, peripherals, or graphics rather than actual
instruction execution - so it probably doesn't make sense to implement all of
these JIT changes at once, without investigating other components in between.

More specific to JITs is the issue that guests may have many differences in
architecture that help or hinder certain optimizations, and the kind of programs
that people care about can cause many differences in behavior that change what
is worth optimizing. For example, if the guest program you care about is itself
a JIT, or frequently modifies its own code, you may want to trade off lookup
speed for cache size or invalidation; while if your guest cannot modify its own
code at all, you may be able to use simpler techniques that don't handle all
cases mentioned. This means that while I can talk about what sorts of situations
these optimizations can accelerate, you will have to use your judgement as to
which will provide your particular use case the most bang for the buck. Knowing
more about the actual characteristics of the code you are executing - what
addresses it jumps to, which instructions it executes most often, etc. will pay
off far more than brute force application of a list of techniques. For context,
my own experience was mostly gained through an N64 emulator, which has two MIPS
III guests on x86_64 desktop hosts. I've also discussed JIT design with inolen
and Merrymage, creators of redream and dynarmic respectively, who both have far
more experience in this subject than I.

We start with the following pseudocode, representing the control flow of an
unoptimized JIT translating one basic block at a time. We won't go into the
details of compilation, because for the simplest binary translators (ones that
don't call LLVM) the overwhelming majority of overhead comes not from
inefficient code or slow compilation, but from the surrounding basic block loop.

```
// outer loop in C++
// lookup = unordered_map<uint32_t, Block>
while (time_slice > 0) {
  pc = check_interrupts(pc);
  block = lookup[pc];
  if (block) pc = block();
  else lookup[pc] = compile(pc);
}

// in every emitted block
save_host_regs(), load_guest_regs()
// translate instructions, set next_pc
save_guest_regs(), load_host_regs()
return next_pc
```

## Indirect Branch Lookup

Our first and most important optimization is to move the most common path
through this outer loop into assembly. Most of the time, we won't need to handle
an interrupt or scheduler event, so blocks only need to verify that they do not
need to exit the JIT, then lookup the address of the translation for next block
and jump to it - if the exit checks do not pass or the next block has not yet
been compiled, only then do we have to incur the overhead of saving and
restoring registers. Doing a hash table lookup in assembly can be expensive, not
to mention difficult to implement, so one way to simplify is to replace it with
a flat lookup table of pointers, one for each possible guest target address.
With this we may be able to replace a function return, hash table lookup, and
function call to the next block, each of which may take a large number of
instructions, with a load of the lookup table base address, a read of the
appropriate element of the lookup table using the guest address, and an indirect
branch to the pointer contained in that element.

Of course, this approach wastes a lot of memory compared to a hash table, but
there are several ways to reduce it. In many consoles, instructions must be
4-byte aligned. Of course, if the guest has virtual memory, you probably do the
physical translation first. If code must be executed from ROM, only ROM
addresses must be included. Even if these are not possible, you can do things on
the host side. When generating blocks, you can align the start address and not
store the last bits of the pointer. You can also reduce the block cache size,
forcing blocks to be within a 32 bit offset from a starting address. Also, keep
in mind that unused areas of the lookup will not slow down lookup by taking up
cache space unless they reduce the density of useful areas, and in fact may not
take up additional physical RAM at all if zero page optimization is applied.
Note that these optimizations may affect the assumptions you can make during the
compilation process, and how often you need to invalidate. For example, physical
lookup means either not using the virtual pc in compiled code, since it could be
different at runtime, or invalidating when the virtual address of a block
changes, and the latter is only possible if a block can only have one virtual
address.

```
// initially lookup[N_PAGES * N_INSTS] = JIT_EXIT
// C++ calls JIT_ENTER(block) instead of block()

// in every emitted block
// translate instructions, save next_pc
if (time_slice -= CYCLES < 0) goto JIT_EXIT
if (has_interrupt) goto JIT_EXIT
goto lookup[next_pc / INST_WIDTH]

// in assembly far code
JIT_ENTER:
save_host_regs(), load_guest_regs()
goto block
JIT_EXIT:
save_guest_regs(), load_host_regs()
return next_pc
```

Once we move the loop into assembly, the prologue and epilogue for entering and
exiting JIT context can also be removed from the individual blocks. You may have
noticed that the loop described above does not mention what we do if the next
guest address has not yet been added to the hash or lookup table, and needs to
be compiled. This is because explicit checks for this can be avoided by
pre-filling the lookup table with the address of a common code fragment that
calls the recompiler, so the single indirect branch can be used for both the
common case of jumping directly to the next block, and the uncommon case of
compiling it. Another source of things that can be moved to "far code" is
exceptions, including interrupts and page faults. These often require storing
the current pc, reading or modifying status registers, and jumping to an
exception handler, though this code is skipped over in most blocks. In general,
it makes sense to find ways of moving as much infrequently used computation as
possible to far code, by for example by forcing the time slice to 0 when an
interrupt occurs, or lazily calculating counter registers from scheduler time,
instead of incrementing it at the end of blocks. This general pattern of
reducing overhead on the common path, at the expense of more logic elsewhere, is
the essence of most JIT optimizations.

## Static Branch Linking

So far, these optimizations have been built on assumptions of the emulator path,
but information available for specific blocks at compile time can be used for
further performance improvements. The most obvious and important if these is
static branches, which almost always jump to the same one or two host addresses.
These are usually so common, in fact, that JITs can replace the ending lookup
for these blocks with a direct host branch, or no branch at all (fallthrough).
This reduces the pressure on the host indirect branch predictor, but makes
modification and invalidation more difficult than with a single global lookup
table. Depending on how complicated your lookup process - for example, if it
requires virtual address translation, checking pipeline states, probing a hash
table, or other complex logic - it could also save memory pressure and
computation.

One way to implement static branch linking involves replacing the lookup part of
the epilogue in blocks ending with static branches. The replacement epilogue
initially includes a few nops followed by a short stub that passes the host
address of the nops and the guest address of the next block to a linker
function. The linker function can then lookup the host address of the next block
using the passed guest address, then write a conditional branch to that host
address at the host address of the nops, which should have been sized so that
this write does not affect the linker call site after it. After the write the
linker should make a note of the host address it just wrote to in a linker table
so that the write can be undone when the target is invalidated. It can then jump
to the host address of the next block to continue execution as usual. If the
next block has not been compiled yet, then we may have to skip the writing and
exit the JIT to compile, then wait for the next time the block is called to
perform any linking.

If the linked block ends in a guest conditional branch, the linker function may
be called a second time from the same site, when the other arm of the branch is
taken. Since there are only two arms, we can assume the linker function cannot
be called a third time from the same site, so we can now write an unconditional
branch to the next host address over that linker call site, assuming there is
enough memory space there before the end of the block. The easiest way to check
this condition is to check whether the host address passed to the linker points
to nops, or if these have already been overwritten. The following pseudocode
shows what the epilogue of a block ending in a guest conditional branch might
look like at the 3 stages in its "life cycle":

```
// initial state of epilogue
START:
nops;
link(START, guest_pc)

// after first call, where link was called with guest_pc = PC1,
// which was compiled to host address BLOCK1
START:
if (guest_pc == PC1) goto BLOCK1
link(START, guest_pc)

// after second link, where link was called with guest_pc = PC2
// which was compiled to host address BLOCK2
START:
if (guest_pc == PC1) goto BLOCK1
goto BLOCK2
```

This is one basic form of static branch linking in a JIT. There is one more
thing that usually needs to be implemented for this to work though, and that is
invalidating these branches when their target block is invalidated. The next
section will include more regarding when invalidation occurs and how to detect
it, but essentially there may be times when the guest code at a certain address
is overwritten and so the code that was first compiled for it is no longer
valid. When this occurs, we need to remove references to it not only from the
lookup table, but also from the links, by first looking up the invalidated block
(or page, depending on the invalidation granularity) in the linker table. We can
then go through all the host addresses that reference that block/page, and
rewrite the original form of the epilogue at those addresses, including both the
nops and the call to the linker function.

## Code Invalidation

One important thing real translators often must handle that isn't shown in the
commonly seen basic loop is code invalidation - detecting when the content of
the basic block at a guest address has changed, and updating the translation.
The most efficient way to do so can vary depending on the properties of the
guest system. One very cheap method for systems that allow self-modifying code,
but where most programs keep code and frequently data relatively far apart, and
writes to code areas don't happen frequently, is to make use of host page faults
to detect writes. In linux this is done through mprotect. After translating a
block, we protect the pages containing guest memory the translation covers. This
means writes that would invalidate any block within that page will now trigger a
host page fault. In the fault handler, we can then calculate the guest address
of the write from the faulting address, find the guest page that was written to,
and invalidate every block within that guest page.

```
// on compiler fetch of new page
page = fetch_addr / PAGE_SIZE;
if (protected[page]) return;
mprotect(base_ram + page * PAGE_SIZE, PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ);
protected[page] = true;

// within page fault handler (N_INSTS = PAGE_SIZE / INST_WIDTH)
if (sig != SIGBUS && sig != SIGSEGV) return;
page = (fault_addr - ram_base) / PAGE_SIZE;
if (fault_addr < ram_base || page >= N_PAGES)) exit(1);
// remove blocks from LUT (unlink blocks here if needed)
memset(block_lut + page * N_INSTS, N_INSTS * sizeof(void*), 0);
mprotect(ram_base + page * PAGE_SIZE, PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE);
protected[page] = false;
```

The primary downside of using host memory protection for invalidation is often
the granularity. Since writes anywhere to a page invalidate all code on that
page, you might find that some pages are invalidated very frequently not because
code is being frequently modified, but because there is frequently modified data
that just happens to be located next to it. When this becomes a problem, it may
be advantageous to switch away from host memory invalidation and instead make
changes to the emitted code for memory accesses, perhaps doing so only when
necessary in a manner similar to fastmem.

The core of finer-grained invalidation is to keep track of precisely which
addresses contain code, and check write addresses against it. Most often this
takes the form of a bitmap, where the bit corresponding to an address is set by
the compiler when it fetches the opcode there, and a whole page of bits is unset
when the corresponding guest page is invalidated. After a write instruction is
executed, there must be code to look up the address in this bitmap, and if that
bit is set, invalidate the page. While accurate, doing this check for a whole
system would take a lot of space and use a lot of overhead for most systems, but
it can make sense when there is very limited memory, or specific pages are known
to frequently contain both data and code. In the latter case access to those
pages would go through a special handler, and the bitmaps would only cover that
subset of memory.

For code that truly is frequently overwritten though, even fine-grained bitmaps
won't help. In that case the simplest option is to emit code at the beginning of
every block that computes a checksum of the addresses it would fetch, and verify
that this is the same as it was at compile time. If they are different, we must
immediately exit the JIT, invalidate the block, and compile a new one. On x86,
the hardware crc32 instructions may be useful for the checksum portion of this
task. In many cases frequently invalidated code is also reused later, so it may
be wise to compute the checkum up to the next branch, instead of to where the
end of the block was at compile time. This way the checksum can be used to index
into a backup content-based block lookup table which can replace the newly
invalidated block without actually recompiling.

Of course, this is all extra code that must be run on every block, so it may be
worth trying to reduce overhead by only running the check when the block's page
is potentially dirty, as detected by page faults or another method. With the
former, the page fault handler might no longer directly modify lookup but
instead mark the page as dirty in a page-granularity bitmap. Each block would
then start with a lookup of the bitmap before conditionally branching to a
handler in far code that would perform the checksum and invalidation. Without
block linking this may be simplified by replacing the block pointer with the
checksum handler pointer directly when the page is dirtied - whether that trade
off is worth it depends on the system, though.

## Memory access

While an inefficient dispatch loop can consistently cause great overhead,
depending on the guest system, memory access from generated code can also be an
important issue. Furthermore, memory access changes can open up avenues to
finer-grained invalidation and other optimizations. Many JITs start out by
handling all access through a set of external read/write functions, requiring
every load and store to save and restore JIT context. Translating the virtual
address to a physical one, determining whether the access needs to go to RAM or
ROM, specially handling memory mapped I/O, and triggering possible interrupts
and watchpoints is done by code outside the JIT. However, executing the common
path through this in assembly directly can significantly reduce overhead.

Inline page tables are useful for systems with virtual memory, where translating
virtual into physical addresses is a common source of complexity on the common
path. Even if this isn't strictly the case, many systems allow RAM banking or at
least group memory mapped IO in a way that can be treated similarly. Before
discussing it though, it should be mentioned that at least for virtual address
translation, if your guest pages are the same size as or larger than your host
pages, you may be able to use the host MMU directly for the task, using mmap()
to transparently turn "virtual" accesses of certain mapped pages into "physical"
accesses of another. However, the 64kb page size (for non-consecutive pages) on
Windows frequently interferes with this strategy. Instead, we must simulate the
guest MMU in code, and the way to do this as quickly as possible is through
precalculating as much as possible during the relatively infrequent address
mapping changes, while simplifying the logic for the common case.

When a new mapping is given to the MMU, we can subtract the starting physical
address from the starting virtual address, and store this difference in a table.
For unmapped pages, I/O, and other logic that may need to be executed, we can
make use of the fact that most systems have much less physical memory than
virtual memory, and encode this data in the unused high bits of the physical
address. For example, we might prefill the table with differences between each
virtual address and the physical address -1 for unmapped pages, and set the msb
of the actual physical address to one for mappings of MMIO pages. The emitted
code for memory accesses first calculates the virtual page, looks up the
difference for that page from the table, and subtracts the difference from the
virtual address. It can then branch to far code if necessary, ideally using
condition bits already set by the previous subtraction. The rest of the logic
for determining whether page fault, MMIO access, or other event has occurred,
and handling it accordingly, is left to far code.

```
// initially pages[vpage] = vpage * PAGE_SIZE + 1
// when vpage is mapped to ppage
if (needs_fallback(ppage)) ppage = ppage + 0x8000'0000;
pages[vpage] = vpage * PAGE_SIZE - ppage * PAGE_SIZE;

// when read from vaddr emitted
vpage = vaddr / PAGE_SIZE
paddr = vaddr - pages[vpage]
host_pc = address_of_label(AFTER)
if (paddr < 0) goto READ_FALLBACK
value = ram_base[paddr]
AFTER:
register = value

// in far code
READ_FALLBACK:
if (paddr == -1) goto PAGE_FAULT
value = mmio_read(paddr - 0x8000'0000)
goto host_pc
```

While this method is much faster than calling to C++ on every access, and can be
pretty close to optimal for systems with full virtual memory on every
instruction, on many systems we can take simplifying the fast path even farther
using a combination of host page fault write detection and backpatching, usually
known as "fastmem". This reduces the initial emitted code for memory accesses to
a direct read or write to an address-space-sized array, where pages that require
more complex code to access - such as TLB-mappable regions and MMIO - are
protected by the host MMU. Accesses to those regions then generates a page
fault, the handler for which can use both the particular protected address
accessed, and the address of the faulting instruction, to replace the direct
write with more complex or specialized code as needed - for example, a call to
an assembly stub implementing inline page table lookup if the write was of a
TLB-mappable region, a call to a stub checking the address against a bitmap if
the write was to a page containing code, or a checked direct call to an MMIO
handler if the write was to an MMIO register. This kind of patching not only
improves RAM access speed, but also makes MMIO polling faster, by making use of
the fact that specific instruction addresses usually access only one or the
other.
